We're now going to look at a second
supervised learning method that in
spite of being called a regression
measure, is actually used for
classification and
it’s called logistic regression.
Logistic regression can be seen as
a kind of generalized linear model.
And like ordinary least squares and other
regression methods, logistic regression
takes a set input variables, the features,
and estimates a target value.
However, unlike ordinary
linear regression,
in it's most basic form
logistic repressions target
value is a binary variable
instead of a continuous value.
There are flavors of logistic regression
that can also be used in cases where
the target value to be predicted is
a multi class categorical variable,
not just binary.
But for now we'll focus on the simple
binary case of logistic regression.
Let's start by looking at linear
regression, which we saw earlier.
Linear regression predicts a real valued
output y based on a weighted sum of
input variables or features xi,
plus a constant b term.
This diagram shows that
formula in graphical form.
The square boxes on the left
represent the input features, xi.
And the values above the arrows represent
the weights that each xi is multiplied by.
The output variable y
in the box on the right
is the sum of all the weighted
inputs that are connected into it.
Note that we're adding b as a constant
term by treating it as the product of
a special constant feature with value
1 multiplied by a weight of value b.
This formula is summarized in
equation form below the diagram.
The job of linear regression
is to estimate values for
the model coefficients, wi hat and b hat.
They give a model that best fit the
training data with minimal squared error.
Logistic regression is similar
to linear regression, but
with one critical addition.
Here, we show the same type
of diagram that we showed for
linear regression with the input
variables, xi in the left boxes and
the model coefficients wi and
b above the arrows.
The logistic regression model still
computes a weighted sum of the input
features xi and the intercept term b,
but it runs this result
through a special non-linear function f,
the logistic function
represented by this new box in the middle
of the diagram to produce the output y.
The logistic function itself is shown in
more detail on the plot on the right.
It's an S shaped function
that gets closer and
closer to 1 as the input value
increases above 0 and closer and
closer to 0 as the input
value decreases far below 0.
The effect of applying the logistic
function is to compress the output of
the linear function so that it's
limited to a range between 0 and 1.
Below the diagram, you can see the formula
for the predicted output y hat which
first computes the same linear
combination of the inputs xi,
model coefficient weights wi hat and
intercept b hat, but runs it through
the additional step of applying
the logistic function to produce y hat.
If we pick different values for
b hat and the w hat coefficients,
we'll get different variants of
this s shaped logistic function,
which again is always between 0 and 1.
Because the job of basic
logistic regression is to predict
a binary output value, you can see how
this might used for binary classification.
We could identify data
instances with the target value
of 0 as belonging to
the negative class and
data instances with a target value of
1 belonging to the positive class.
Then the value of y hat, that's the output
from the logistic regression formula,
can be interpreted as the probability
that the input data instance belongs to
the positive class,
given its input features.
Let's look at a specific example of
logistic regression with one input
variable.
Suppose we want to whether or not
a student will pass a final exam based on
a single input variable that's the number
of hours they spend studying for the exam.
Students who end up failing the exam
are assigned to the negative class,
which corresponds to a target value of 0.
And students who pass the exam
are assigned to the positive class and
associated with a target value of 1.
This plot shows an example training set.
The x-axis corresponds to
the number of hours studied and
the y-axis corresponds to
the probability of passing the exam.
The red points to the left,
with a target value of 0 represent points
in the training set, which are examples of
students who failed the exam, along with
the number of hours they spent studying.
Likewise, the blue points with target
value 1 on the right represent points in
the training set, corresponding
to students who passed the exam.
With their x values representing
the number of hours those students spent
studying.
Using logistic regression, we can
estimate model coefficients for w hat and
b hat that produce a logistic curve
that best fits these training points.
In this example that logistic curve
might look something like this.
Once the model coefficient has been
estimated, we now have a formula
that can use the result logistic function
to estimate the probability that
any given student will pass the exam,
given the number of hours they've studied.
Students who estimated probability of
passing the exam is greater than or
equal to 50% are predicted
to be in the positive class.
Otherwise, they're predicted
to be in the negative class.
So in this example we can see
that students who study for
more than three hours will be
predicted to be in the positive class.
Let's look at an example that uses two
input features now, instead of one.
Here the plots show a training
set with two classes.
Each data point has two features.
Feature 1 corresponds to the x-axis, and
Feature 2 corresponds to the y-axis.
The data points in the red
class on the left,
form a cluster with low Feature 1 value,
and high Feature 2 value.
And the points in the blue class have
intermediate Feature 1 value, and
low Feature 2 value.
We can apply logistic regression
to learn a binary classifier
using this training set, using the same
idea we saw in the previous exam example.
To do this, we'll add a third dimension
shown here as the vertical y-axis.
Corresponding to the probability of
belonging to the positive class.
We'll say that the red points
are associated with the negative class and
have a target value of 0, and the blue
points are associated with the positive
class and have a target value of 1.
Then just as we did in the exam studying
example, we can estimate the w hat and
b hat parameters of the logistic function
that best fits this training data.
The only difference is that the logistic
function is now a function of two input
features and not just one.
So it forms something like a three
dimensional S shaped sheet in this space.
Once this logistic function has been
estimated from the training data,
we can use it to predict the class
membership for any point,
given its Feature 1 and Feature 2 values,
same way we did for the exam example.
Any data instances whose logistic
probability estimate y hat is greater than
or equal to 0.5 are predicted to
be in the positive blue class,
otherwise, in the other red class.
Now if we imagine that there's
a plane representing y equals 0.5,
as shown here,
that intersects this logistic function.
It turns out that all the points that
have a value of y = 0.5, when you
intersect that with a logistic function,
the points all lie along a straight line.
In other words, using logistic regression
gives a linear decision boundary between
the classes as shown here.
If you imagine looking straight down on
the 3D logistic function on the left,
you get the view that looks something
like something on the right.
Here.
The points with y greater or equal to 0.5
on the logistic function, lie in a region
to the right of the straight line,
which is the dash line on the right here.
And the points with y less than
0.5 on the logistic function
would form a region to
the left of that dash line.
Let's look at an example with
real data in Scikit-Learn.
To perform logistic,
regression in Scikit-Learn,
you import the logistic regression class
from the sklearn.linear model module,
then create the object and call the fit
method using the training data just as you
did for other class files
like k nearest neighbors.
Here, the code also sets a parameter c
to 100, which we'll explain in a minute.
The data set we're using here is
a modified form of our fruits data set,
using only height and width as
the features, the features space, and
with the target class value modified
into a binary classification problem
predicting whether an object is an apple,
a positive class, or
something other than an apple,
a negative class.
Here is a graphical
display of the results.
The x-axis corresponds to
the height feature and
the y-axis corresponds
to the width feature.
The black points represent the positive
apple class training points.
And the yellow points are instances of
all the other fruits in the training set.
The gray decision region represents
that area of the height and
width feature space, where a fruit
would have an estimated probability
greater than 0.5 of being an apple.
And thus classified as an apple according
to the logistic regression function.
The yellow decision region corresponds
to the region of feature space for
objects that have an estimated probability
of less than 0.5 of being an apple.
You can see the linear decision
boundary where the grey region
meets the yellow region,
that results applying logistic regression.
In fact, logistic regression results
are often quite similar to those you might
obtain from a linear
support vector machine,
another type of linear model
we explore for classification.
Like ridge and lasso regression,
a regularization penalty on the model
coefficients can also be applied
with logistic regression, and
is controlled with the parameter C.
In fact, the same L2
regularization penalty used for
ridge regression is
turned on by default for
logistic regression with
a default value C = 1.
Note that for both Support Vector
machines and Logistic Regression,
higher values of C correspond
to less regularization.
With large values of C,
logistic regression tries to fit
the training data as well as possible.
While with small values of C, the model
tries harder to find model coefficients
that are closer to 0, even if that model
fits the training data a little bit worse.
You can see the effect of changing
the regularization parameter C for
logistic regression in this visual.
Using the same upper class of fire we
now vary C to take on values from 0.1 on
the left to 1.0 in the middle,
and 100.0 on the right.
Although the real power of
regularization doesn't become evident
until we have data that has higher
dimensional feature spaces.
You can get an idea of the trade off
that's happening between relying on
a simpler model, one that puts more
emphasis on a single feature in this case,
out of the two features, but
has lower training set accuracy.
And that's an example as shown
on the left with C = 0.1.
Or, better training data fit
on the right with C = 100.
You can find the code that created this
example in the accompanying notebook.
Finally, we show how logistic regression
again, with L2 regularization turned
on by default, can be applied to a real
data set with many more features.
The breast cancer data set.
Here, logistic regression achieves both
training, and test set accuracy of 96%